If you run

    snapback watch

or

    ssh -t {the-server} snapback watch

you'll see a lot of info.  If you decrease/increase the width of your screen,
you'll see less/more info from 'ps'.  If you decrease/increase the height of
your screen, you'll see fewer/more sections and sub-sections.

If your screen is tall enough to show 'df', you'll see filesystem usage.  If
filesystem usage is too high, check "Number pruned snapshots awaiting 'rm'";
if there's few, you'll probably need to increase the rate of pruning in
/etc/snapback/configure.sh (normally, backups take priority over pruning; but
when the filesystem usage threshold ('min_FS_usage_percent' in
/etc/snapback/configure.sh.sample) is exceeded, this priority is inverted
... so the pruning will proceed faster than the backups); see Install.txt for
details on such tuning.

There are now more stats sections than can fit on a typical screen with a
readable font.  To see _all_ the stats sections, run one of:

    snapback watch -s
    ssh -t {the-server} snapback watch -s

I spent a couple of hours trying to include the output of 'rsync --progress',
but it was never reliable, so I gave up.  The only sign of activity (besides
the slowly incresing 'ps' TIME) is to watch IUsed (Inodes Used) go up (your
screen needs to be tall enough to see the 'df' output) ... although it could
instead go down from a pruning job.

The -C option shows the Cron job(s).  Unless your screen has a zillion lines
(i.e. very tall and/or small font), a lot of sections will disappear as soon
as a big cron job starts, because -C prioritizes fitting the cron job on the
screen.

Typically, the cron job starts every hour on the hour; it will start to get
smaller over time, as rsync finishes on the smaller or faster partitions (or
ones with limited $dirs_to_backup.  Also, the "biggest" cron job only appears
by "restarting fresh" (pruning-jobs run for hours, so the typical cron job
doesn't have to do much pruning).  If you want to see the full cron job,
first run:

    snapback kill b,p all

which kills both backups and pruning on all the partitions ... which is
*completely* *safe*, there are *no* *races*, this is done *all* *the* *time*.
Really.  Run the kill (in another window) *after* you start "snapback watch",
so you can 'watch' the kill take place (some commands take time to
die, because they're waiting to finish expensive I/O).
